---
title: "Rumor Echo Chamber: An Amplifier of Rumor Spread in Social Media"
excerpt: "Daejin Choi, Selin Chun, Hyunchul Oh, Jinyoung Han, and Taekyoung 'Ted' Kwon"
collection: datasets
---

Daejin Choi, Selin Chun, Hyunchul Oh, Jinyoung Han, and Taekyoung "Ted" Kwon, under review

-----

## Abstract
Spreading rumors on the Internet has become increasingly pervasive due to the
proliferation of online social media. This paper investigates how rumors are
amplified by a group of users who share similar interests or views, dubbed as an
echo chamber. To this end, we identify and analyze rumor echo chambers, each of 
which is a group of users who have participated in propagating common rumors. 
By collecting and analyzing 125 recent rumors from six popular fact-checking sites, 
and their associated 289,202 tweets/retweets generated by 176,362 users, we find 
that the rumors that are spread by rumor echo chamber members tend to be more viral 
and quickly propagated than those that are not spread by echo chamber members. We 
propose the notion of an echo chamber network that represents relations among rumor 
echo chambers. By identifying the hub rumor echo chambers (in terms of connectivity 
to other rumor echo chambers) in the echo chamber network, we show that the top 10% 
of hub rumor echo chambers contribute to propagation of 24% rumors by eliciting
more than 36% of retweets, implying that core rumor echo chambers significantly
contribute to rumor spreads.


-----
## Measurement Framework

To identify and analyze echo chambers in rumor propagation, we developed the
data collection system as shown in the figure below, by which we crawled
the rumors and their meta information from the six popular online debunking
websites: snopes.com, politifact.com, factcheck.org, hoaxslayer.com, 
truthorfiction.com, and urbanlegends.about.com. Since all the above services 
did not provide APIs to collect data, we fetched every single web page and 
extracted rumor-related information including the claim (description of a rumor), 
veracity (e.g., true, false), category (e.g., politics, health), editor who 
determines the veracity of the rumor, and description of evidence. The description 
of rumors (i.e., claims) is delivered to the keyword extractor, which generates 
a set of words by tokenizing a given claim and removing stopwords. Note that we 
only considered the claims that include more than three words to avoid collecting 
trivial tweets/retweets. Finally, the generated set of words for a rumor is
forwarded to the Twitter crawler in our system. 

The Twitter crawler retrieved the tweets/retweets associated with rumors by
using the Tweepy, a Python library for accessing the Twitter
Search API. Among the collected tweets/retweets, we filtered
out the retweets generated by bot accounts using the machine learning-based
algorithm suggested in Davis et. al.. That is, the bot detection
model accepts a user ID, gathers information of the user in Twitter, and builds
more than 1,000 features including information diffusion patterns, social
contacts of an account, inter-tweet time distribution, etc. Using the features
and pre-trained model with high performance (AUC: 0.95), we finally identified
15.5% accounts as bots, and their tweets/retweets are removed while building
rumor cascades. We also collected the information of users associated with the
collected tweets/retweets, including the follower/following information and all
the tweets posted on the timeline.

Using the collected tweet/retweets of the crawled rumors, we build rumor
cascades, where nodes and edges represent a set of tweet/retweets and
retweeting actions, respectively. Since the crawled retweets include only the
original tweet information, we infer the retweet path of a tweet by using the
original post ID and users' follower information. That is, for a given original
tweet t written by user i, we first extracted a set of retweets whose
original tweet is t (denoted as S<sub>t</sub>). We then chose a subset of retweets
whose elements (i.e., retweets) are written by i's followers (denoted as
S'<sub>t</sub> ) which are deemed child retweets of the original tweet. To find
retweet paths of the retweets in S'<sub>t</sub>, we first sorted the retweets in
S'<sub>t</sub> in a chronological order and then inferred retweet paths of each
retweet with a similar manner. Note that this approach assumes that users may
tend to retweet from earlier tweet/retweets. By recursively computing retweet
paths until all tweet/retweets in S<sub>t</sub> found the path, we can finally build a
retweet cascade that represents a rumor cascade. Note that we only consider
rumor cascades whose sizes are equal to or greater than 100 in our analysis.

-----
## Dataset

Collecting rumors and their associated rumor cascades from Jan. 2018 to Oct.
2018 for 10 months, we finally obtain 125 rumors whose veracity is true, false,
or mixed, and 37,417 rumor cascades consisting of 289,202 tweets/retweets
written by 176,362 users. Note that we keep the terms of use of all target
services during the data collection process, and the collected dataset is
anonymized. We make the information of the rumors investigated in this paper
publicly available as follows. The other datasets analyzed during the current 
study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request. 

* [Rumor Information]({{ base_path }}/files/srep-rumors/rumors.tsv) (29K)
  * Each columns are seperated by tab('\t').
  * Dataset Schema is written in the first row of the file.

-----
## Supplementary Materials

* [Echo Chamber Network] ({{ base_path }}/files/srep-rumors/ecn.html)

<span style="color:red">This work is currently under review. Do not use the datasets before published</span>.
-----
## Contact
Daejin Choi (djchoi@gatech.edu)
Jinyoung Han (jinyounghan@skku.edu)

